-What is devops - Dev + Ops
Devops is a set of practices that combines or Collaborate the software development and IT Operations.

Software development  - Write the code, build the code, Test the code
It Operations - Release, monitor, Operate

Ex : Home , about us, pages - To write the code and to develop and then the testing
Operations - Continuous integer, Operate and monitor

DEvops - 2007 
 
Benefits of devops : 

Faster - Solve out the issues and deployment
Scalability - 
Stable operation environment - 

Speed - Whenever we get the issues in any application to sort this the devops. 
Because of the devops tools we can easily solve easily and speed up our application

Before devops - If any application has any issues to sort out, we should write the entire code of the application. If we push the all code
After code - We have created for payments one server, login one server, application one server, products one server in cloud Cloud services ( AWS, Azure & GCP)

Any issues in payment  - WE will go into that server and we solve that issues.
 Before - 1 server - all application s
After devops - We created one server that will collapse. Remaining will occur smoothly, normally or without any issues.

Security - previously we store our d drives, system, hard disk save that data. Pull that 

All pushing our code, our servers to the cloud. Whenever we want to make changes or else whenever you want the application we will pull the cloud directly from the cloud. To pull out the cloud, create a firewall - we will not give access. ‘

Collaboration  - if we got the management or else form the team we are accountability, and ownership.
Responsibility, and make the work should be done by collaborating with the developers, - it operations
It operations  - developers

Reliability - quality of the work or application updates and infrastructure changes. We use for ci, cd, to test the each page of the application

Rapid delivery - improve the product faster. 

Cost saving - In AWS Server - we use we should have to pay - Benefits

Automation - 

History of devops - 

Devops became famous - for fast delivery, collaborating the developers and its operations at a time. For systematic development and deployment of the applications. 

It is originated in 2008



7 steps in devops - 
Plan - 
Code - 
Build - 
Test - 
Release - 
Deploy -  
Operate - 
Monitor  - 

Virtualization - 

Conterization - Packaging of the software component and its environments(libraries, frameworks), dependencies  so they are called as conterization

Configuration Management - Establishing and maintaining consistency of the process of the product’s performance, functional and physical attributes with its requirements. 


Plan - how many pages are required
Code - based on our application
Build - Whether its work 
Test - If any issues are there or not ( go back the code - where the issues and we have to sort out)
Test - is fine
Release - We will release the code
Deploy - Server 
Operate - operating the pages or software is working or not
Monitor - 

Destination of any place or journey with friends : 

Plan - starting point and destination point
Cost - Rooms, to spent & to manage
Locations- How from from our starting point or else form hotel where we are staying
Route map  - directions 
accessiors/lagguages - things we have to wear or accessories we need in trip
‘

Devops basics and tools we use in devops - Fine or any doubts

OS - Linux
Cloud Services - AWS - 3 types - aws, azure & GCP 

Tools - 
Git - local 
Github
Jenkins
MAven
Docker
Ansible

Linux - 

What is Linux - 
It is an open source Operating system. Open source - Anywhere we can able to access the linux - If WE can able to add and remove the services. 

Operating system - which manages the hardware, software resources based

Linux was introduced - Linus Trovalds - In which year 1991

Linux is the updated version of Unix.

Difference b/w Linux and Unix - 
Unix - 1969 Linux - 1991
Systme type - Complete os Linux System tuyoe - Kernel
Source - It is free           Unix - Cutomized
Cost - Free		Unix - We have to pay the cost based on the requirements
It is portable		Unix - It in Non - portable
Secuirty- 

Linux - Different pecies - 

Kernel
Boot loader
Init System
Daemons
Graphical Server
Desktop environment
Applications

Why use Linux - 
It is freely accessible, Highly usable availability, Every can use it without issues. Because it is open source

Core components of Linux : 

Kernel : It is the core component of linux. It is responsible for the all major activities of the os. It hides the low level hardware details to the system or application. 

System Utility - System utility : It is a responsible for individual tasks or specialized characters or tasks

System Library - It is also called as special functions.  It utilizes the kernel features but it doesn’t require kernel modules.

Basic features of Linux 👍

Portable
Open source
Multi user (Multi tasking)
Security
Shell
Hierarchical file system
Multi programming 

Architecture of Linux : 



In Linux Everything is a command
2 Types of Users in Linux - 
Normal User - $ - 
Root User - # - Without any issues we can able to access all the services and we done the all things using root user
Root user is administrator of Linux

Sometimes we have to use character (Single char) Single Word 

Linux Commands Types -

File commands
Directory Commands
File content Commands
Utility Commands
Admin Commands

File commands - 

Touch - To create the empty text file
Ls - To view the all files and directories
Cp - To copying the same data in another file (source file will be available)
Mv - Move or Rename (Both are the same) (source will be not available)
Rm - Removing the file

In VI Editor - 3 modes -Insert - To add the content in the file
			    ESC - Transfer from one mode to another
			Colon - :wq!
				:w (To save the data in file)

Directory Commands - 

Pwd - (present working directory) 
Mkdir - To create directories
Rmdir - To remove directories (To remove forefully - rm -rf)
Cp - To copy the directories
Mv - To move the directories
Cd - Change directory - To change from one directory to another directories

Linux directory structures - 

/etc - 

File Content 
Cat - 
Head - 
Tail - 
Grep - 
Awk - 
VI  - 

Utility commands

Find
Curl
Tar
Unzip

Admin Commands : 	

Process management Commands : 

Ps - Process Status - It will give you the PID, ps -u = PID, UID, CMD, TTY
Ps -ef = UID, PID, PPID, TTY, CMD

Kill - To Stop the process of th PID

User Management Commands- 

Groupadd  - 

Useradd - 

Usermod
Visudo
Sudo
su

Package Management : 

Yum list installed - To find out the installed we use this command
Yum list available - To findout available we use this command
Yum list all  - Both the installed and available 

To install - yum install nginx (Jenkins) (Java)
To update - yum update nginx
To remove - yum remove nginx
To 
Yum remove


AWS : 


Types of Cloud Services or cloud platform : AWS, Azure and GCP

AWS - Amazon web services 

Why the AWS is used for : 

IT is designed to allow the application providers , ISV and vendors to quickly host the application. 
(Or)

IT is the highly demand and most comprehensive cloud platform, It offers the services of 100 - 200. So we use this AWS. Because it is very low cost. What we have to use we have to pay for it. 

Why we use AWS : 
To store the data
To create app platform
To create services
For security
Cost -effective ( what we use we have to pay for it) 
Reliable for every services.

Services IN AWS : 

EC2, IAM,AMI, VPC, Load balancers, S3, EBS, SQS, SNS, EFS

Types of instances in EC2 : 

On - demand INstances, Spot INstances, REserved instances



Important AWS Services (Aws Services)

Compute
Storage
Database
Networking
Analytics
Messaging
Management Tools
Migration
Security

Compute: 

EC2 : Elastic compute Cloud or elastic cloud compute) : Ec2 is the virtual Machine 

, Lambda : Allow you to run the code in the code. Big cost server of the aws

, Beanstalk : It offers automated deployments and provisioning of the highly scalable projects

, Light sail : Automatically deploy and manages the computer, storage and network capabilitues
l, EKS (Elastic container service for kubernetes) : Without any installation in the cloud we can able to use the kuberenets

Storage Services : 

Amazon glacier : 
Elastic Block Storage
Storage Gateway

Security Services : 
IAM : 
Cloud directory
KMS : 
Shield :  It is managed by DDOS ( Distributed Denial of service protection)
Organizations : 
Inspector
Certificate Manager : 
WAF 

Database services : 

RDS (Relational Database Service) - To setup, operate and scale a relational database

DynamoDB : NoSQL Database service. It is a simple service which allow cost-effective storage and retrieval of data. 
Elastic cache : It is web service which makes us to easy to deploy, operate and scaling in the cache in the cloud
Redshift : 

Data1

Data2				Data transformation 

Data3 

Neptune : in graphical database service 

Management Services : 

Cloud formation : It is the way of turning infrastructure into the cloud. 

Cloud trail: It is an easy method for the auditing aws services or resources. It helps you to log all changes

Cloud watch : It is to watch the all aws environment services ec2, rds

System manager : It allows you to identify issues and act on them. It allows you to group resources

Cloud front : It is web service that speeds up the distribution of static and dynamic web content

Autoscaling : 

Config

Managed services : It is a way lto offload general tasks to an expert in order to reduce cost, improve service quality. 
Application Services : 

SNS : 
SQS : 
Elastic Transcoder : 
SWF

Developer Tools : 

Code commit
Code deploy
Code build
Code pipeline
Cloud9
Codestar
Cloudartifact

Cat /etc/gshadow : X (To findout group passwd is set or not)

Types of Instance Based on the Cost : 

Types of Requests : 

ON Demand Instance : It is for a particular Committments. Cost is high when compared to the Reserved Instance. (Pay-you-go) (For hourly or Moin)

Spot Instance : When compared to the other Requests. Spot instance cost is low and we can use this.

Reserved Instance : For the Reserved for a limit of atime or years we will use this. 


EC2 Instance : 

1st - Create the instance
2nd - Create Volumes ( Instance and volume should be in same availability zone)
3rd - We have to attach to the EC2 instance
4th - We have to create the snapshot using volume 
5th - findout the disk space using command - fdisk -l ( Or lsblk)
6th - Create New partition space using commands - fdisk device name dev/xdvf)
7th - we have to 
7th - find out the partition space fdisk -l
8th - format mkfs partition space
9th - to create directory by using mkdir
10th - mount partition name dir.name
11th - mountpoint dir.name
12th - to unmount it by using command (umount dir.) r umount partition
13th - check whether it is unmount r not (mountpoint) r df -h




14th - to detach volumes
15th - retrieve the volumes from the snapshots (restore the volume from snapshot-actions)

IN EC2 (Load Balancer and Auto scaling Configuration)

1st - We have to create the instance in Ec2
2nd - Setup the Load Balancers and connect to the instance
3rd - Create the Target Groups and connect to the Load balancers and in Security groups add the inbound rules (ALL TCP)
4th - Lauch configuration setup 
5th - Create AMI
6th - Autoscaling setup and add the desired capacity,  

AMI (Amazon MAchine Image)


We will create the AMI using the Instance
If we want to terminate we can terminate the instance ( But the ami will not be deleted)
We can launch the instance using AMI 

7 steps of creating instance 

Choose AMI
Instance type
Storage
Key pair
Tags
Network Setting
Configuration Storage  (Lauch Instance)

IAM (Identity and Access Management)

Types of Roles in IAM :
 
Basic
Predefined Roles
Custom Roles

What is AWS: 

Types of Cloud services : AWS, AZURE and GCP

AWS - Amazon web services

It is the fastest growing servies with the 200+ featured services
It includes the largest enterprise, startup enterprises and leading govt sectors

What are the benefits and use of AWS : 

Security
Operational Expertise
Cost saving
Performance efficiency
DEployment of global
Faster Innovation
Elasticity
Relability
Data loss prevention

Regions in AWS - 22 or 23

What are the Main concepts in AWS : 

Compute
Storage
Database
Security
Analytics
Networking
MAnagement
Developers tools
Mobile
IOT
Enterprise Application

What is cloud computing : 
It is an on-demand delivery of IT services. We can pay as you go as per your usage of the data or else services. 

Benefits of Cloud computing : 

Cost saving
Deploy your projects in min
Elasticity
Agility

Types of Cloud computing : 

IAAS - Infrastructure as a Service
PAAS - Platform as a Service
SAAS - Software as a service

Compute : 

EC2 : Amazon Elastic Cloud Compute

It will deploy and develop the application faster and it eliminates the hardwire upfront. It is the scalable computing. 
It scales the traffic up and down and optimize

What are the 7 steps in EC2 : 

Choose AMI
Storage
Key Name (Tags)
Keypair
Instance type
Network Settings
Configure 

Features of EC2 : 

Another name for instance is Virtual server, Virtual Computing Environment
Preconfigured the templates for the AMI
Secure Login INformation with the keypairs
Storage the volume whatever you have hidden, terminated or stop all this storages are placed in the storage volume
To get the know the exact services of the instances we use the tags (Tags are nothing but the Identify the Purpose of the server or what we using this server)
REgions and Availablity Zones : 

How wil WE setup the EC2 : 

AMI : 

What is AMI (AMazon MAchine Image) : 

It is supported and maintained image. It will provides the information that is required to lauch the instance

What is the AMI Includes : 

Launch the permission that controls the AMI
One or more Elastic block storage
MApping

Use of AMI : 

AMI —----- Launch the instance (USing the Image) —------Copy the AMI


AMI Types : 

Regions
OPS
Architecture
Storage 
Lauch permission

In Lauch permissions : 

Explicit - To specific AWS Account to give the permission or access we will use this Explicit
Implicit -  For An AMi we will give the permissions or ACcess
Public  - to access the all users

AMI Lifecycle : 

Create an AMI
Copy the AMI
Restore and store the AMI USe S3
Derigester the AMI
Deprecate the AMI
ReCover the AMI (HOw will you recover the AMI) - USing the Recycle bin

Setup of AMI : 

First we will lauch the Instance 
USing the instance we will lauch AMI

If we want to lauch the instance from AMI we will terminate the previous instance from where we have lauched the instance and we can lauch the New instance using this AMI

AMI Catalog : 

It is the supported and maintained image and whatever the information required to lauch the instance the AMI Catalog

Can you able to multiple instances using AMI ? 

WE can able to launch the multiple instance using single ami

EBS(Elastic Block storage)

EBS Snapshots : 

Snapshot in AWS EC2: 

Whatever the volume the created for that backup is snapshot. 

Where the snapshot are stored in S3.

Difference b/w the snapshot and AMI:

AMI : IT is the backup of the entire server which includes or attached all the EBS Volume
Snapshot : Certain volume of data backup a Snapshot

Types of Snapshots : 
2 fundamental - copy-on-write redirect-on-write

Why the snapshots are used in aws

What is load balancing: 

It is the method of distributing the traffic equally

Benefits of Load balancing

Scalability
Availability
Performance
Security

Types of Load Balancer: 

Application load balance
Network load balancer
Gateway load balancer
Classic Load balancer

What is load balancer

“Traffic cop”

Role of load balancer 

It acts as a reverse proxy and it distributes the application or network traffic across multiple server.

Certificate Manager - In load balancers - 2 certificate - DNS and Email Notification

Request certificate Manager - Public - Domain Name - 

Autoscaling : 

It monitors the application and adjust the capacity and make it steady.
Components of auto scaling groups 🙂

Scaling policies, scaling activites and scaling processes

Aws Auto scaling : Launch configurations and auto scaling groups.

What are the advantages : 
To make the app stable
Better fault tolerance
Cost management
Configure it in the multiple availability zones

In Auto scaling will create multiple instance
Load balancer it will distributes the traffic

Types of compute auto scaling: 

2 types - Metric based autoscaling
	Schedule based autoscaling

What are the things we have to do before auto scaling

Launch the instance
We can also have to create the AMI
Setup the lauch configurations
We have to setup the autoscaling
In autoscaling we have to select the instance we have created and we have to configure 

VPC: (Virtual Private cloud)

What is public cloud : In public cloud every one can able to access our servers

Private cloud : Only a single person or single tenant can able to access it. 

What are the advantages of using vpc than private cloud 👍

Security
Scalability
Performance better

Steps to create a VPC:

Create VPC

We have to create subnets - Public subnet and private subnets

Public subnet - IPV4 CIDR - it shos from th vpc ip b/w 16 -32 or 16 -28
Private subnet - IPV4 CIDR - it varies from 32/16 - 16/28

Go To Route tables - 2 route tables - public and private

Public route table is associated to the public subnets
Private route table is associated to the private subnets

We have edit Routes the Public route - Enable dns
			Private - Edit HOst name

Internet gateway - What ever the vpc we have created we have to attach the VPc
                          
 GO to Routes - Inbound rules and outbound rules 
		We have to access the traffic - Give the Internetgateway 
Public - we have to attach internet gateway
Private - we have to attach the Nat Gateway

NAT Gateway - We have the public subnet and in connectivity - public
And we have to allocate elastic ip 
Got to Route tables - All traffic 
    			Ip address - nat gateway - Created

We have to create Security groups - Create the security group and attach to the vpc

Nect Launch the instance


S3 - Simple storage Services

It is released in 2006
SQS - It is the firse services - 2004

AWS s3 - 1st storage cloud service

S3 _ It is used to store the data

S3 - Global service

Purpose of Versioning
What is versionsing in s3
Why we disable the public access when we creating the buckets

Bucket name should be different
